---
date: 2025-03-26
---

I just finished reading Nicholas Carr’s new book [Superbloom](https://www.nicholascarr.com/?page_id=664). Here are some highlights.

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
  <p>We spend our days sharing information, connected as never before, but <span class="highlight">the more we communicate, the worse things seem to get</span>.
</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

Paraphrasing Charles Cooley:

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p><span class="highlight">Every new medium creates a new environment</span>. As we adapt to the environment, it shapes our perceptions and thoughts, our relationships with others, even our sense of self.</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

Quoting Harold Innis:

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p>Enormous improvements in communication have made understanding more difficult.</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

That quote is from [1948](https://gutenberg.ca/ebooks/innis-minerva/innis-minerva-00-h.html#:~:text=Enormous%20improvements%20incommunication%20have%20made%20understanding%20more%20difficult).

On the advantages of segregated and limited devices, each specialised to handle individual forms of media:

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p>The specialized technology served as a means to sort and segregate information and regulate the pace and timing of its delivery.
    <br>...Like the legal and regulatory system that surrounded it, the analog media system was imperfect, but <span class="highlight">its very messiness helped maintain communication’s human scale</span>.</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

On social media:

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p>Open-ended, contemplative ways of thinking—the philosophical, the ruminative, the introspective—have also been marginalized. That’s one of the reasons our culture has become so politicized in recent years.</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p>By turning us all into media personalities, social media has also turned us all into rivals.</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

On the dangers of techno-optimism through the retrospective lens of letting social media ‘innovate’ unchecked:

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p>These misperceptions had consequences. They prevented society from undertaking a careful, clear-eyed assessment of the risks presented by the net and, subsequently, social media, and <span class="highlight">they removed from public discussion legal and regulatory options that might have tempered some of the technology’s ill effects</span>.</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

Quoting Walter Lippmann, on his concept of each of us having our own internet-fuelled “pseudo-environment”:

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p>People all “live in the same world, but they think and feel in different ones.”</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

Did I say _internet_? That quote is from 1922, from Lippman’s book [Public Opinion](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_Opinion_(book)>). He was making a more general (yet prescient) point about human nature that connective technology exacerbates.

On LLMs:

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p>The next wave of innovations—larger language models, more convincing chatbots... will only drive us further into the emptiness of hyperreality.</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>

OpenAI’s [recent research on ChatGPT-induced loneliness](https://cdn.openai.com/papers/15987609-5f71-433c-9972-e91131f399a1/openai-affective-use-study.pdf) seems to get at a similar conclusion.

And finally, an underwhelming suggested response to our predicament:

<figure class="quote">
  <blockquote>
    <p>We have speed bumps on roads to slow people down and safeguard the public; why not on the net?</p>
  </blockquote>
</figure>
